##The Other Side


Alfred Kubin


An irresistible sleeping sickness had Pearl in its grip. It broke out in the Archive and from there spread across the whole of the Realm. It was an epidemic and no one could resist. One minute a man would be boasting how wide awake he was, the next he had succumbed to the germ.##The Screaming Skull


F. Marion Crawford


Francis Marion Crawford (1854–1909) was an Italian-born American writer and historian noted for his many novels, especially those set in Italy, and for his classic weird and fantastic stories, including ‘The Upper Berth’ (1895), ‘For the Blood is the Life’ (1905), and the story included herein, the lively and horrific ‘The Screaming Skull’ (1908). A posthumous collection of Crawford’s tales published in 1911 as Wandering Ghosts in the US and as Uncanny Tales in England was an important transition point between old and new approaches to supernatural fiction. The story contains an outstanding early example of modern monologue, verging on stream-of-consciousness at times.##The Willows


Algernon Blackwood


Algernon Blackwood (1869–1951) was a prolific English writer best known for his supernatural horror. In tales such as ‘The Willows’ unease is generated by ambiguity that mixes the weird with a talent for writing about wild or rural places – a break with the past and the classic haunted house. Although Lovecraft thought Blackwood a master of the ghost story, Blackwood famously was not as impressed with Lovecraft. Noted critic S. T. Joshi has stated that Blackwood’s short story collection Incredible Adventures ‘may be the premier weird collection’ of the twentieth century. Along with Alfred Kubin and F. Marion Crawford, among others, Blackwood helped usher in the modern era of weird fiction.##Sredni Vashtar


Saki


Saki (1870–1916) was the pen name of English writer Hector Hugh Munro, whose career was cut short when he died during World War I. Although Saki wrote plays, histories, and parodies, he specialized in writing outrageous and macabre stories that often skewered Edwardian society and culture. Considered a master of the short form, Saki is often compared to O. Henry and Dorothy Parker, although he is much more refined than O. Henry. His prose style is nuanced and exquisite, with his cleverness masking surprising depth at times. Sredni Vashtar, with its hint of the weird peeking through, is one of Saki’s more subtle and enigmatic tales.##Casting the Runes


M. R. James


M. R. James (1862–1936) was an English writer and mediaeval scholar. His ghost stories have come to be widely regarded as among the finest in English literature. By ignoring the formal Gothic trappings used by previous writers of supernatural fiction, James helped to update the weird tale. ‘Casting the Runes’ (1911) is his most famous tale, situating the weird in a contemporary context while still acknowledging the writer’s own historical interests. It is genuinely unsettling, even today. The story has been adapted for radio, film, and stage several times. James’s influence is reflected in the work of both H. P. Lovecraft and Clark Ashton Smith, as well as Ramsey Campbell and Tanith Lee.##How Nuth Would Have Practised His Art Upon the Gnoles


Lord Dunsany


Despite the advertisements of rival firms, it is probable that every tradesman knows that nobody in business at the present time has a position equal to that of Mr. Nuth. To those outside the magic circle of business, his name is scarcely known; he does not need to advertise, he is consummate. He is superior even to modern competition, and, whatever claims they boast, his rivals know it. His terms are moderate, so much cash down when the goods are delivered, so much in blackmail afterwards. He consults your convenience. His skill may be counted upon; I have seen a shadow on a windy night move more noisily than Nuth, for Nuth is a burglar by trade. Men have been known to stay in country houses and to send a dealer afterwards to bargain for a piece of tapestry that they saw there – some article of furniture, some picture. This is bad taste: but those whose culture is more elegant invariably send Nuth a night or two after their visit. He has a way with tapestry; you would scarcely notice that the edges had been cut. And often when I see some huge, new house full of old furniture and portraits from other ages, I say to myself, ‘These mouldering chairs, these full-length ancestors and carved mahogany are the produce of the incomparable Nuth.’##The Man in the Bottle


Gustav Meyrink


Gustav Meyrink (1868–1932) was an Austrian writer who moved to Prague as a teenager and lived there for twenty years. Early works included grotesque satires after which he largely graduated to weird pseudo-science and contes cruel. He is most famous for his novel The Golem (1914). Other books by Meyrink include Walpurgis Night (1917) and The Angel of the Western Window (1927). Meyrink considered himself an amateur expert on theosophy, Kabbalah, Christian Sophiology, and Eastern mysticism. He once translated fifteen volumes of Charles Dickens because he needed the money. ‘The Man in the Bottle’ is typical of Meyrink’s weird stories: grotesque, brief, and flecked with the decadent.##The Dissection

Georg Heym

The dead man lay alone and naked on a white cloth in a wide room, surrounded by depressing white walls, in the cruel sobriety of a dissection room that seemed to shiver with the screams of an endless torture.##The Spider


Hans Heinz Ewers


Translated into English by Walter F. Kohn##The Hungry Stones


Rabindranath Tagore


Rabindranath Tagore (1861–1941) was a Nobel Prize-winning Indian Bengali writer who forever changed Bengali literature and music through his fiction, poetry, drama, music, and advocacy. At the height of his international popularity, he was almost as well-known as Mahatma Gandhi. Tagore modernized Bengali art by rejecting traditional forms. His work encompassed both the personal and the political, with many critics praising his lyricism, colloquialism, and naturalism. Tagore’s short stories hold the highest reputation among his writings, perhaps in part because he is credited with originating the Bengali-language version of the form. ‘The Hungry Stones’ (1916) is among the most overtly weird, or supernatural, of his tales.##The Vegetable Man


Luigi Ugolini


Translated into English by Brendan and Anna Connell##The People of the Pit


A. Merritt


A. Merritt (1884–1943) was an American fiction writer and highly successful journalist who traveled the world and reportedly compiled a library of over five thousand occult books. Writing stories was a sideline in part because the journalism paid so well. The writer Gertrude Barrows Bennett (Francis Stevens) heavily influenced Merritt’s fiction, especially in terms of her fascination with strange monsters and ruined civilizations. Rumor has it that Merritt’s fiction may have itself influenced the US television series Lost. The tale reprinted here, ‘The People of the Pit’, first appeared in 1918 in All-Story Magazine. The story is a strong example of early American pulp magazine fiction in a weird mode.##The Hell Screen


Rynosuke Akutagawa


Translated into English by Morinaka Akira##Unseen – Unfeared


Francis Stevens


Francis Stevens (1883–1948), was the pen name of Gertrude Barrows Bennett, the first major American female writer of fantasy and science fiction. Stevens wrote a number of acclaimed fantasies between 1917 and 1923 and has been called ‘the woman who invented dark fantasy’. Among her most famous books are Claimed (1920), which H. P. Lovecraft called, ‘One of the strangest and most compelling science fantasy novels you will ever read’. She also wrote the lost world novel The Citadel of Fear (1918) and an early dystopian novel titled The Heads of Cerberus (1919). Although not all of Stevens’ work has dated well, ‘Unseen – Unfeared’ remains a potent example of the classic weird tale.##In the Penal Colony


Franz Kafka


Translated into English by Ian Johnston##The White Wyrak


Stefan Grabinski


Translated into English by Miroslaw Lipinski##The Night Wire


H. F. Arnold


H. F. Arnold (1902–1963) was an American pulp-era writer who wrote only three published stories. Despite this low output, ‘The Night Wire’ (1926), first published in Weird Tales, is considered the most popular story from the first golden age of that magazine. Lovecraft is said to have loved this story. ‘The Night Wire’ is perhaps remarkable in still being able to chill the reader today despite using elements that could have made the story feel dated. It is a perfect example of how the weird creates not just unease, but dislocation. Details about the writer’s life are scarce, without even confirmation that ‘H. F. Arnold’ was his real name. Some have speculated that he must have been a journalist.##The Dunwich Horror


H. P. Lovecraft


H. P. Lovecraft (1890–1937) was perhaps the most influential twentieth-century American author of weird fiction. Lovecraft’s fiction did not become popular overnight: he had a cult readership during his lifetime, and readers could be put off by a worldview that reflected the idea of ‘cosmic horror’. Lovecraft believed that life is ultimately incomprehensible to human beings and the universe is a cold, hostile place. Despite this, he became increasingly popular, to the point that creations like the Cthulhu Mythos have entered our common lexicon. Much about Lovecraft’s life and beliefs are problematic to modern readers, but the stories have been enduring because, as in the best weird fiction, the images and situations have a visionary and timeless quality. ‘The Dunwich Horror’ (1929) showcases many of his strengths.##The Book


Margaret Irwin


Margaret Irwin (1889–1969) was an English writer of a long series of critically acclaimed historical novels as well as the supernatural classic Still She Wished for Company (1924). She wrote her first ghost story at age five and continued to write them for much of her life, the best collected in Madame Fears the Dark (1935) and Bloodstock (1953). ‘The Book’ (1930) is one of only a handful of ghost stories ‘weird’ enough to appear in this anthology. The writer Joanna Russ, appearing herein with another unusual ghost story, described ‘The Book’ as ‘one of the most interesting stories of the supernatural I ever read,’ a sentiment also expressed by contributor and New Weird writer China Miéville.##The Mainz Psalter


Jean Ray


Translated into English by Lowell Blair##The Shadowy Street


Jean Ray


Translated into English by Lowell Blair##Genius Loci


Clark Ashton Smith


Clark Ashton Smith (1893–1961) was an important, largely self-taught American writer whose stories frequently appeared in Weird Tales and who maintained a long-term correspondence with both H. P. Lovecraft and swords-and-sorcery writer Robert E. Howard. Published in several influential Arkham House editions, Smith’s fiction often reflected his interest in poetry and art. He generally wrote in a rich, almost florid style that could seem archaic but also achieve amazing flights of imagination. Out of Space and Time and Lost Worlds are among his best-known collections. In ‘Genius Loci’ (1933) Smith employs a somewhat more restrained style to tell a classic weird tale.##The Town of Cats


Hagiwara Sakutaro


Translated into English by Jeffrey Angles##The Tarn


Hugh Walpole


Hugh Walpole (1884–1941) was a very popular and prolific English writer who published thirty-six novels, five volumes of short stories, two plays and three volumes of memoirs. His skill at scene-setting, his vivid plots, and his high profile as a lecturer brought him a large readership in the UK and North America. A bestselling author in the 1920s and 1930s, his works have been neglected since his death. Although best-known for his historical novels, Walpole also penned classic tales of the supernatural, including ‘The Clocks’ (1913), ‘The Twisted Inn’ (1915), ‘Tarnhelm’ (1933) and ‘The Silver Mask’ (1933). However, ‘The Tarn (1936) – a perceptive, clever, and all-too-true weird tale – remains our personal favorite.##Sanatorium Under the Sign of the Hourglass


Bruno Schulz


Translated into English by Celina Wieniewska##Far Below


Robert Barbour Johnson


Robert Barbour Johnson was an American writer who wrote six stories for Weird Tales, of which ‘Far Below’ (1939) became one of the most popular ever published in the magazine. Not much is known about Johnson, except that he called himself ‘the Outsider’ and was listed as one of the younger writers for Weird Tales. ‘Far Below’ name-checks H. P. Lovecraft and reflects the influence of the story ‘Pickman’s Model.’ Although some aspects of the story haven’t dated well, it is still powerful and strange, conveying some of the same sense of awe and horror as ‘The Night Wire’ by H. F. Arnold.##Smoke Ghost


Fritz Leiber


Fritz Leiber (1910–1992) was an influential, award-winning American writer of fantasy, horror and science fiction. H. P. Lovecraft, Robert Graves, and Carl Jung all helped inspire his fiction. Although perhaps best-known for the swords-and-sorcery Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser series, Leiber also wrote several sui generis macabre novels and stories. Our Lady of Darkness (1977) is among the best-known of his horror novels and, like much of his later fiction, includes autobiography by way of his real-life struggles with depression and alcoholism. Along with such novels, stories like ‘The Girl with the Hungry Eyes’ (1949) and the classic reprinted here, ‘Smoke Ghost’ (1941), made Leiber a key forerunner of the urban weird of writers like Ramsey Campbell.##White Rabbits


Leonora Carrington


Leonora Carrington (1917–2011) was a famous English-born surrealist painter and writer who lived in Mexico for most of her life. ‘From a very young age,’ Leonora Carrington has said, ‘I used to have very strange experiences with all sorts of ghosts [and] visions.’ Although her art has overshadowed her fiction, Carrington’s odd stories have been important to many writers, including Angela Carter. Collections include The Seventh Horse and The Oval Lady. Her stories and the novel The Hearing Trumpet provide a tantalizing glimpse of ways that surrealism might have had more influence on the weird tale. A strong synergy exists between her work and stories herein by Mervyn Peake, William Sansom, and Mercè Rodoreda, among others.##Mimic


Donald A. Wollheim


Donald Wollheim (1914–1990) was an American science fiction writer as well as an influential editor and publisher. Eventually inducted into the Science Fiction Hall of Fame, Wollheim edited the first science fiction reprint anthology, The Pocket Book of Science Fiction (1943) and the first collection of science fiction novels, The Portable Novels of Science (1945). A long-time influence on US science fiction fandom, Wollheim also founded the first major publishing house devoted to science fiction and fantasy, DAW Books, which is now run by his daughter. The weird tale ‘Mimic’ has been widely reprinted and was made into a feature film in 1997. It evokes other stories in this volume by Steven Utley and William Gibson and John Shirley.##The Crowd


Ray Bradbury


Ray Bradbury (1920–) is an American fantasy, horror, science fiction, and mystery writer best known for his novel Fahrenheit 451 (1953) and for the science fiction stories published as The Martian Chronicles (1950) and The Illustrated Man (1951). Bradbury has become one of the most celebrated writers of speculative fiction, with more than twenty films based on his work. Although readers may think of Bradbury as writing short stories mostly in a fantastical or even whimsical vein, the core of his work is dark and disturbing, as exemplified by ‘The Crowd’ (1943). The story’s stripped-down approach and sense of modern anxiety encapsulates one of the ways in which##The Long Sheet


William Sansom


William Sansom (1912–1976) was an idiosyncratic English writer known for applying a surrealist’s sensibilities to the weird tale. Obscure today, Sansom enjoyed a brief period of acclaim in the 1940s and 1950s, when the fresh originality of his stories earned him a place in leading British literary magazines. A firefighter in London during the Blitz of World War II, Sansom managed to transform his experiences in a way that garnered him comparisons to Franz Kafka. Sophisticated yet passionate, his stories reward repeated readings. ‘The Long Sheet’ (1944) was published before the English translation of Kafka’s ‘In the Penal Colony’ and yet in their use of weird ritual to illuminate society the two stories share some similarities.##The Aleph


Jorge Luis Borges


Translated into English by Andrew Hurley##A Child in the Bush of Ghosts


Olympe Bhêly-Quénum


Olympe Bhêly-Quénum (1928–) is a Beninese writer, journalist, literary critic, and researcher. Born in Ouidah, Benin, Bhêly-Quénum won the Grand prix littéraire de l’Afrique noire for Le Chant du lac in 1966. He moved to France in the late 1940s and lives there today. In the 1960s he served as the editor-in-chief of the African magazine L’Afrique Actuelle and then served with UNESCO. His stories and novels originally written in French have been translated into English, German, Czech, and Japanese. ‘A Child in the Bush of Ghosts’ (1950) is a ghost story, perhaps, but also a surreal vision; André Breton famously called the story ‘du rêve a l’état brut’ (dream of the raw).##The Summer People


Shirley Jackson


Shirley Jackson (1916–1965) was an American writer best-known for her story ‘The Lottery’ (1948), although much of her other short fiction is as good or better. Her novel The Haunting of Hill House (1959) is considered one of the most important horror novels of the twentieth century. Her influence can be seen in the work of many fantasists, including Joanna Russ, Kelly Link, and Neil Gaiman. The founding of the Shirley Jackson Awards and publication in 2010 of a collected stories volume by the Library of America has helped to cement her popularity. ‘The Summer People,’ selected for Best American Short Stories in 1951, is a chilling yet subtle tour de force of the weird.##The Man Who Sold Rope to the Gnoles


Margaret St. Clair


Margaret St. Clair (1911–1995) was an American science fiction writer whose most creative period was during the 1950s, when she wrote such acclaimed stories as ‘Brightness Falls from the Air’ (1951), ‘An Egg a Month from All Over’ (1952), and ‘Horrer Howce’ (1956). In 1951 she also published the classic ‘The Man Who Sold Rope to the Gnoles’. Satirical, weird, and with a nod to the Lord Dunsany story collected earlier in this volume, ‘The Man Who Sold Rope to the Gnoles’ has bite…and teeth. St. Clair largely stopped writing short stories after 1960. The Best of Margaret St. Clair (1985) provides a good overview of her short fiction.##The Hungry House


Robert Bloch


Robert Bloch (1917–1994) was an iconic American writer, primarily of crime, horror, and science fiction. Bloch wrote hundreds of short stories and over twenty novels. As one of the youngest members of the so-called Lovecraft Circle, Bloch found a needed mentor in Lovecraft, among the first to encourage his talent. Early on, Bloch contributed to pulp magazines such as Weird Tales, and later won the Hugo Award, the Bram Stoker Award, and the World Fantasy Award. The pop culture popularity of his novel Psycho (1959), which became the model for mindless slasher films, tended to obscure Bloch’s more subtle talents. ‘The Hungry House’ (1951) represents Bloch at his most complex and devastating.##The Complete Gentleman


Amos Tutuola


Amos Tutuola (1920–1997) was a largely self-taught Nigerian writer who became internationally praised for books based in part on Yoruba folktales, especially the phantasmagorical The Palm-Wine Drinkard (1952). Welsh poet Dylan Thomas called the novel ‘thronged, grisly and bewitching,’ bringing it even more attention. But Tutuola was also criticized for the novel’s ‘primitive’ style, seen to promote negative stereotypes about Africa. However, from the perspective of weird fiction aficionados the book is as amazing an accomplishment as anything from Clark Ashton Smith, H. P. Lovecraft or Alfred Kubin, even as it takes completely different cultural referents as its entry point into the weird. ‘The Complete Gentleman’ is a self-contained excerpt from the book.##‘It’s a Good Life’


Jerome Bixby


Jerome Bixby (1923–1998) was an American short story and script writer who wrote four Star Trek episodes and helped write the story that became the classic sci-fi movie Fantastic Voyage (1966). He is most famous for the ‘It’s a Good Life’ (1953), also made into a Twilight Zone episode and included in Twilight Zone: The Movie (1983). The Science Fiction Writers of America named ‘It’s a Good Life’ one of the twenty finest science fiction stories ever written. References to the story have appeared in the Cartoon Network’s Johnny Bravo, Fox’s The Simpsons, and a Junot Diaz novel, among others. The story has an enduring creepiness and complexity undiluted by parodies and pop culture references over the years.##Mister Taylor


Augusto Monterroso


Translated into English by Larry Nolen##Axolotl

Julio Cortázar

There was a time when I thought quite often about the Axolotl. I used to go and see them in the aquarium of the Jardin des Plantes and remained for hours captivated, gazing at them, observing their immobility, their indistinct movements. Now I, too, am an Axolotl.##A Woman Seldom Found


William Sansom


William Sansom (1912–1976) was an English writer who worked as a firefighter during the Blitz and was directly influenced by the Surrealists. Using descriptive, muscular prose, Sansom took the mundane and transformed it through his surrealist’s eye. His previous story in this volume, ‘The Long Sheet,’ explored weird ritual. ‘A Woman Seldom Seen’ (1956), by contrast, is something rare for Sansom: an excellent example of the traditional weird tale and his most anthologized story. Readers wishing to explore more of Sansom’s prose should seek out the new volume from Faber & Faber, The Stories of William Sansom (2011).##The Howling Man


Charles Beaumont


Charles Beaumont (1929–1967) was a prolific American author who established himself as a script writer in Hollywood and died of a brain disorder at the tragically young age of thirty-eight. In addition to his macabre short stories, he wrote several Twilight Zone episodes, but also penned the screenplays for cult films like 7 Faces of Dr. Lao, The Intruder, and The Masque of the Red Death. The classic story reprinted here, ‘The Howling Man’ (1959), was adapted as a screenplay for Twilight Zone. In the episode, a reference to a cross was changed to ‘staff of truth,’ out of fear of a backlash from Christian preachers. In its approach, the story oddly evokes Decadent-era writing and spotlights Beaumont’s stylistic prowess.##Same Time, Same Place


Mervyn Peake


Mervyn Peake (1911–1968) was a visionary English writer, poet, and artist named in The Times’s list of ‘The 50 Greatest British Writers since 1945’. Peake is best known for the phantasmagorical Gormenghast series (1946–1959). Parkinson’s disease robbed Peake of the ability to complete the later novels in the cycle. Early influences included Charles Dickens and Robert Louis Stevenson, but the weirdness that permeates his work also demonstrates knowledge of Decadent-era literature and, in art, the Grotesques. Much of his short fiction is collected in Boy in Darkness and Other Stories (1976). ‘Same Time, Same Place’ (1963) shares affinities with the work of Leonora Carrington in its glimpse of the hidden in our contemporary world.##The Other Side of the Mountain


Michel Bernanos


Translated into English by Gio Clairval##The Salamander


Mercè Rodoreda

I strolled down to the water, beneath the willow tree and through the watercress bed. When I reached the pond I knelt down. As always, the frogs gathered around me. Whenever I arrived, they would appear and come jumping toward me. As soon as I started to comb my hair, the mischievous ones would stroke my red skirt with the five little braids or pull at the festoon on my petticoat full of ruffles and tucks. The water would grow sad and the trees that climbed the hill would gradually blacken. But that day the frogs jumped into the water, shattering the mirror in the pond, and when the water grew still again his face appeared beside mine, as if two shadows were observing me from the other side. So as not to give the appearance of being frightened, I stood up and without saying a word began walking calmly through the grass. But the moment I heard him following me, I looked back and stopped. A hush fell over everything, and one end of the sky was already sprayed with stars. He stopped a short distance away and I didn’t know what to do. I was suddenly filled with fear and began to run, but when I realized he would overtake me, I stopped under the willow tree, my back to the trunk. He came to me and stood there, both arms spread wide so I could not run away. Then, gazing into my eyes, he began to press me against the willow, my hair disheveled, between the willow and him. I bit my lips to keep from screaming; the pain in my chest was so great I thought my bones were on the point of breaking. He placed his mouth on my neck, and where he had laid his mouth I felt a burning.##The Ghoulbird


Claude Seignolle


Translated into English by Gio Clairval##The Sea Was Wet As Wet Could Be


Gahan Wilson


Gahan Wilson (1930–) is an iconic American writer and cartoonist who has received the World Fantasy Lifetime Achievement Award. (The World Fantasy Award bust of H. P. Lovecraft was designed by Wilson.) His art, routinely appearing in The New Yorker, intersects with his fiction in their shared playful grotesquery. Stories have appeared in Playboy, Omni, and, perhaps most famously, in Again, Dangerous Visions with a tale whose title was simply an ink blob. The three-volume set, Gahan Wilson: 50 Years of Playboy Cartoons (2010), showcases his art. ‘The Sea Was Wet As Wet Could Be’ (1967), using Lewis Carroll’s Through the Looking Glass as partial inspiration, is one of the weirder and more disturbing tales in this volume.##Don’t Look Now


Daphne du Maurier


Daphne du Maurier (1907–1989) was an extremely popular English author and playwright. Many of her works have been adapted into films, including the novels Rebecca (1938), which won the Best Picture Oscar in 1941, Jamaica Inn (1936), and the story ‘The Birds’ (1963), all three movies directed by Alfred Hitchcock. Du Maurier’s ‘Don’t Look Now’ (1971), included herein, was adapted into a cult classic film directed by Nicolas Roeg in 1973. The novella is a masterpiece of the occult, its hints of a world beyond embodying the best of weird fiction. Du Maurier was one of five Women of Achievement selected for a set of British stamps issued in August 1996.##The Hospice


Robert Aickman


Robert Aickman (1914–1981) was an English ghost-story writer, considered the best of his generation. However, Aickman described his fiction as ‘strange’ and the term ‘weird’ fits just as well. Long considered a classic, ‘The Hospice’ (1975), demonstrates the qualities by which Aickman pushed passed the familiar or comforting and into the unsettling. The mysterious is balanced by a perfect character study and precision of detail. Although perennially under-appreciated, Aickman did receive such awards as the World Fantasy Award and the British Fantasy Award. Aickman also served as a chairman of the London Opera Society and was active in the London Opera Club, the Ballet Minerva, and the Mikron Theatre Company in London.##It Only Comes Out at Night


Dennis Etchison


Dennis Etchison (1943–) is an American writer and editor of fantasy and horror fiction. His novels include Darkside (1986), Shadowman (1994), and California Gothic (1995). Etchison’s stunning short stories have been especially well-regarded by critics and genre fans, receiving the World Fantasy Award and the British Fantasy Award. Stories like ‘It Only Comes Out at Night’ (1976) demonstrate the effectiveness of Etchison’s minimalist approach – naturalistic but still undeniably strange, unease becoming horrific sometimes in the span of a single paragraph. Etchison helped influence and shape the US horror boom of the early 1990s, while remaining sui generis.##The Psychologist Who Wouldn’t Do Awful Things to Rats


James Tiptree, Jr.


James Tiptree, Jr. (1915–1987) was an award-winning American speculative fiction writer whose visionary stories and novels often seemed to have no antecedent. The author’s real name, not known publicly until 1977, was Alice Bradley Sheldon, which she termed ‘good camouflage’. Although Sheldon gained a sterling reputation within the science fiction field, winning the Hugo Award, her fantastical Quintana Roo stories set on the Yucatan Peninsula are also very powerful. Occasionally she would write within or at the edges of recognizable traditions of weird fiction, as exemplified by the very dark ‘The Psychologist Who Wouldn’t Do Awful Things to Rats’ (1976).##The Beak Doctor


Eric Basso


Eric Basso (1947–) is an American poet, novelist, playwright, and critic, born in Baltimore, Maryland. ‘The Beak Doctor’ novella reprinted herein has had a cult following among avant-garde Gothic writers since it was first published by the Chicago Review in 1977. Since then he has published a novel, several plays, many poetry collections, and a book of nonfiction. In part, ‘The Beak Doctor’ reads like a modern, more Joycean version of the first selection in this anthology, Alfred Kubin’s ‘The Other Side,’ in that the nameless city is plagued by a strange sleeping sickness. Despite being criminally overlooked, Basso is an important part of the landscape of weird fiction.##My Mother


Jamaica Kincaid


Immediately on wishing my mother dead and seeing the pain it caused her, I was sorry and cried so many tears that all the earth around me was drenched. Standing before my mother, I begged her forgiveness, and I begged so earnestly that she took pity on me, kissing my face and placing my head on her bosom to rest. Placing her arms around me, she drew my head closer and closer to her bosom, until finally I suffocated. I lay on her bosom, breathless, for a time uncountable, until one day, for a reason she has kept to herself, she shook me out and stood me under a tree and I started to breathe again. I cast a sharp glance at her and said to myself, ‘So.’ Instantly I grew my own bosoms, small mounds at first, leaving a small, soft place between them, where, if ever necessary, I could rest my own head. Between my mother and me now were the tears I had cried, and I gathered up some stones and banked them in so that they formed a small pond. The water in the pond was thick and black and poisonous, so that only unnamable invertebrates could live in it. My mother and I now watched each other carefully, always making sure to shower the other with words and deeds of love and affection.##Sandkings


George R. R. Martin


George R. R. Martin (1948–) is an American writer of fantasy and science fiction best-known for his Song of Ice and Fire epic fantasy series, which contains its share of weird supernatural elements. According to myth, he began his career selling monster stories to other neighborhood children for pennies. Subsequent work has won many awards, including the Hugo and World Fantasy awards. Despite readers’ strong association of Martin with fantasy fiction, Martin’s devotion to the horror field has been lifelong. Classics in this mode from Martin include the truly terrifying ‘Nightflyers’ (1980), the disquieting ‘The Pear-Shaped Man’ (1987), and the stunningly weird science fiction story reprinted herein, ‘Sandkings’ (1979), winner of both the Hugo and Nebula awards.##Window


Bob Leman


Bob Leman (1922–2006) was an American science fiction and horror short story author, most often associated with The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction. Leman’s first story appeared when he was forty-five. ‘Window’ (1980), which continues this anthology’s exploration of ‘weird science fiction,’ is his most famous story. Nominated for the Nebula Award, it was adapted for an episode of Night Visions, directed by and starring Bill Pullman. Another of Leman’s stories, ‘How Dobbstown Was Saved’, was to have been published in the Harlan Ellison anthology The Last Dangerous Visions but eventually appeared in the collection Feesters in the Lake and Other Stories (2002).##The Brood


Ramsey Campbell


Ramsey Campbell (1946–) is an award-winning horror-fiction author from Liverpool, England, mentored by Lovecraft protégé August Derleth. In his stories, largely evoking working- or middle-class settings, Campbell manages to update the weird tale and apply his keen ability to evoke both subtle supernatural horror and portraits of modern life in England. One of the preeminent writers of his generation, Campbell has also edited influential supernatural fiction anthologies; three of his top ten favorite stories are reprinted in The Weird (‘The Willows’ by Blackwood, ‘Smoke Ghost’ by Leiber and ‘The Hospice’ by Aickman). ‘The Brood’ (1980), as noted by the anthologist when first published, ‘has the cumulative effect of a nightmare from which one cannot awake’.##The Autopsy


Michael Shea


Michael Shea (1946–) is an American writer of horror, dark fantasy, and science fiction who has won the World Fantasy Award several times. Shea’s unique work includes novels like Nifft the Lean (1982) that are influenced by Jack Vance but stand on their own for the intensity of their imagery and grotesquery of their situations. The Color Out of Time (1984) is similarly an homage to H. P. Lovecraft’s ‘The Color Out of Space’ that has its own unique appeal. At the short length, Shea has written several masterpieces, including ‘The Autopsy’ (1980), a Hugo and Nebula award finalist. Clinical, precise, humane, and terrifying, ‘The Autopsy’ plays with the idea of demonic possession from a weird science fiction perspective.##The Belonging Kind


William Gibson and John Shirley


William Gibson (1948–) is an American-Canadian writer who has been called the ‘noir prophet’ of the cyberpunk subgenre. John Shirley (1953–) is an American writer of novels, short stories, and film scripts, associated with both cyberpunk and splatterpunk. Gibson met Shirley at a science convention in the early 1980s and they became good friends. ‘The Belonging Kind’ (1981) originally appeared in Charles Grant’s classic Shadows anthology series and seems to synthesize the best of Gibson’s and Shirley’s solo work. It’s a wonderful weird form of speculative fiction, creepy and thought-provoking – and also the only collaborative story in The Weird.##Egnaro


M. John Harrison


M. John Harrison (1945–) is an influential English writer whose story ‘The New Rays’ also appears in this volume. Harrison was a leading figure in the British science fiction New Wave of the 1960s, along with writers like Michael Moorcock and J. G. Ballard. However, only Harrison can be said to have written in such a way as to modernize or comment on the traditional weird tale in his short fiction. His work has been instrumental to several generations of fantasists working in non-escapist modes. ‘Egnaro’ suggests at least two interpretations by story’s end, one of which repudiates the idea of reportage from weird or supernatural places.##The Little Dirty Girl


Joanna Russ


Joanna Russ (1937–2011) was an important American writer, academic, and critic whose ground-breaking dystopian novel The Female Man (1975) and influential nonfiction tract How to Suppress Women’s Writing (1983) have unfortunately overshadowed a body of short fiction as various and rich as that of Angela Carter or Shirley Jackson. Russ wrote both science fiction and fantasy, with a number of stories coming from a horror or weird fiction slant. Collections include The Zanzibar Cat (1983), (Extra) Ordinary People (1985) and The Hidden Side of the Moon (1987). ‘The Little Dirty Girl’ (1982), like previous stories by Margaret Irwin and Robert Aickman, has an essential clarity yet abiding weirdness not usually found in supernatural tales of this type.##The New Rays


M. John Harrison


M. John Harrison (1945–) is an award-winning English writer best-known for the quasi-fantastical Viriconium Sequence of stories and novels. His most recent works have been in a science fictional mode, with Light (2002) managing to be contemporary, futuristic, and deeply weird. Harrison is known as a consummate short story writer for his ability to wed the supernatural or the suggestion of the supernatural with deep psychological portraits of flawed people. ‘The New Rays’ (1982) fuses weird science with Harrison’s usual devotion to place and character. His work has influenced many writers, including Neil Gaiman, China Miéville, and Clive Barker (all included in this anthology).##The Discovery of Telenapota


Premendra Mitra


Translated into English by P. Nandy##Soft


F. Paul Wilson


F. Paul Wilson (1946–) is a popular American writer of science fiction and horror. In 1981, his epic horror novel The Keep became an international bestseller. In the 1990s, he wrote science fiction and medical thrillers. With Matthew J. Costello, Wilson created and scripted FTL Newsfeed, which ran daily on the Sci-Fi Channel from 1992–1996. Among Wilson’s best-known characters is the anti-hero Repairman Jack, an urban mercenary introduced in the 1984 bestseller, The Tomb. H. P. Lovecraft is a major influence on Wilson, who was introduced to his work by Donald Wollheim, both of whom are also included in this volume. ‘Soft’ (1984) has a surreal and disturbing quality typical of Wilson’s stories from this period.##Bloodchild


Octavia E. Butler


Octavia Butler (1947–2006) was an American writer who became the first science fiction writer ever to receive the MacArthur Foundation Genius Grant. At the time, Butler was also one of the only African American women in the science fiction field. In 2010, she was inducted into the Science Fiction Hall of Fame. Butler’s novels include Kindred (1979) and Parable of the Sower (1993). ‘Bloodchild’ (1984) is her most famous story, winning both the Hugo and the Nebula Award for best novelette. Although ‘Bloodchild’ might be the best example of weird science fiction by Butler, she often included horrific elements in her work. Butler wrote the story as a way of overcoming her fear of bot flies.##In the Hills, the Cities


Clive Barker


Clive Barker (1952–) is an English writer best known for his work in both fantasy and horror fiction. His first interests were the theater and painting, but he burst onto the publishing scene in the mid-1980s with The Books of Blood. The stories published in these volumes permanently changed the landscape of weird fiction. They were visceral; modern; went beyond the scare into richer, deeper territory; and often featured transgressive body horror. ‘In the Hills, the Cities’ (1984) is a classic from this period, continuing this anthology’s theme of ‘weird ritual.’ Barker has since written many novels and other works, and his fiction has been adapted into motion pictures, notably the Hellraiser series.##Tainaron: Mail From Another City


Leena Krohn


Translated into English by Hilda Hawkins##Hogfoot Right and Bird-Hands


Garry Kilworth


Garry Kilworth (1941–) is a highly respected English writer who has published dozens of fantasy, science fiction, and historical novels since the 1970s. A World Fantasy Award winner, Kilworth has also won the Charles Whiting Award for Literature and written a number of books for children, including the Welkin Weasel series. Short story collections include Let’s Go to Golgotha (1975), In the Country of Tattooed Men (1993), and Tales from a Fragrant Harbour (2010). ‘Hogfoot Right and Bird-hands’ (1987) may be Kilworth’s most famous story, in a few short pages evoking wonder, mystery, and horror to create an amazingly potent ‘weird science fiction’ tale.##Shades


Lucius Shepard


Lucius Shepard (1947–) is an award-winning American writer whose fiction often contains an element of supernatural horror and reflects personal experience from his extensive travels overseas. Briefly associated with the cyberpunk movement, Shepard quickly established himself as sui generis with novels such as Life During Wartime (1987) and The Scalehunter’s Beautiful Daughter (1988). More recently, novels such as Viator (2005) have confirmed Shepard’s status as one of his generation’s best writers of weird fiction. Long stories have been Shepard’s particular strength, collected in, among others, The Jaguar Hunter (1987), Trujillo (2004), and The Best of Lucius Shepard (2008). ‘Shades’ is a unque and unflinchingly weird ghost story that also serves as a commentary on the devastation of war.##The Function of Dream Sleep


Harlan Ellison®


Harlan Ellison (1934–) is an iconic writer called ‘one of the great living American short story writers’ by The Washington Post. His career has spanned over fifty years and he has won more awards for his work than any other living speculative fiction writer, with seventy-five books and over seventeen-thousand short stories, novellas, screenplays, teleplays, essays, and a wide range of criticism covering literature, film, television, and print media. He was editor and anthologist for two ground-breaking science fiction anthologies, Dangerous Visions and Again, Dangerous Visions. Although several classic earlier stories might have fit this anthology, 1988’s ‘The Function of Dream Sleep’ best exemplifies Harlan Ellison’s contributions to the weird tale.##Worlds That Flourish


Ben Okri


Ben Okri (1959–) is an iconic Nigerian writer who often experiments with new literary forms, styles, genres, and traditions. Although he began his career as a realist dealing with postcolonial themes, Okri soon delved into what has been called, for lack of a better term, a form of ‘African magic realism’. Myths from the Yoruba culture have been particularly prominent in his subsequent work, including in his masterpiece, the Booker Prize winner The Famished Road (1991). Okri himself emphasizes that the surreal or fantastical elements in his work coexist with the real (and urban) world in his fiction. Luminous and strange, ‘Worlds that Flourish’ (1988) is a wonderful contemporary evocation of an encounter with the weird.##The Boy in the Tree


Elizabeth Hand


Elizabeth Hand (1957–) is an American writer of cross-genre fiction who grew up in New York State. She has won the World Fantasy award, the James Tiptree Jr. Award, Nebula Award, and Shirley Jackson Award for novels and short fiction. Hand has long had an interest in outsider artists, and even her mainstream novel Generation Loss (2007) deals with that subject matter. As for the story reprinted herein, a unique blend of the supernatural and science fiction, it has its inspiration in real life: ‘I had my own encounter with the numinous in…1974, when I had an epiphanic vision of a Dionsyian figure I named The Boy in the Tree’. The result is a tale both disturbing and beautiful.##Family


Joyce Carol Oates


Joyce Carol Oates (1938–) is an American author who has published over fifty novels, as well as many volumes of short stories, poetry, and nonfiction. Her novel them (1969) won the National Book Award, and her novels Black Water (1992), What I Lived For (1994), and Blonde (2000) were nominated for the Pulitzer Prize. In addition to portraying compelling, complex characters, Oates excels at writing stories with a New Gothic or weird sensibility, many of them terrifying or disturbing. ‘Family’ (1989) is a tale of weird science fiction horror and strange ritual that reads like the love-child of Shirley Jackson and China Miéville.##His Mouth Will Taste of Wormwood


Poppy Z. Brite


Poppy Z. Brite (1967–) is an American author who initially achieved success during the ‘new gothic’ boom after publishing several critically acclaimed novels. However, Brite’s work always contained more influence from Decadent-era French and English writers than the contemporary horror scene. ‘His Mouth Will Taste of Wormwood’ (1990) is a direct but original nod to those writers; Brite’s strain of the weird is extravagantly and unrepentantly sensual. The writer is also influenced by the city of New Orleans, and has published a series of contemporary novels focused on the New Orleans restaurant world. Much of Brite’s work features bisexual and gay characters, and her fiction from the 1990s must be considered ground-breaking for this reason also.##The End of the Garden


Michal Ajvaz


Translated into English by James Naughton##The Dark


Karen Joy Fowler


Karen Joy Fowler (1950–) is an American writer who has written science fiction, fantasy novels and stories that tend to work by way of ambiguity, misdirection, and deep characterization. Although she is best-known for her New York Times bestseller The Jane Austen Book Club (2004), also made into a movie, novels such as Sarah Canary (1991), The Sweetheart Season (1996), and Sister Noon (2001) cemented her reputation as a writer of the first rank. Story collections include Artificial Things (1986), Black Glass (1997), and What I Didn’t See (2010). Although Fowler rarely writes stories that could be called horror or weird, ‘The Dark’ is a powerful and topical exception.##Angels in Love


Kathe Koja


Kathe Koja (1960–) is an American writer who first emerged as a novelist during the US horror boom of the early 1990s. Kafkaesque, transgressive novels such as The Cipher (1991), Bad Brains (1992), Skin (1993), and Strange Angels (1994) established her as one of weird fiction’s most innovative practitioners. Story collaborations with science fiction writer Barry Malzberg broadened her oeuvre, and as Koja moved into the realm of young adult novels her work continued to evade easy categorization. In 2010 her first historical novel, Under the Poppy, was published, with the sequel to follow in 2012. As ‘Angels in Love’ (1991) demonstrates, Koja’s version of the weird is both claustrophobic and luminous, continually questioning the nature of reality.##The Ice Man


Haruki Murakami


Translated into English by Philip Gabriel##Replacements


Lisa Tuttle


Lisa Tuttle (1952–) is an American writer of fantastical fiction who lives in Scotland. An early member of the Turkey City Writer’s Workshop, she won the 1974 John W. Campbell Award for Best New Writer in Science Fiction. Her first novel came out in 1980 and was co-written with George R. R. Martin. Since then, Tuttle has published more than a dozen novels, including Lost Futures (1992), Mad House (1998), and The Mysteries (2005). Collections include A Nest of Nightmares (1985) and My Pathology (2001). The chilling and atmospheric ‘The Replacements’ (1992) is a weird classic, often reprinted, including in the Joyce Carol Oates-edited American Gothic Tales.##The Diane Arbus Suicide Portfolio


Marc Laidlaw


Marc Laidlaw (1960–) is an eclectic American writer of science fiction and horror whose long career has included a stint in the cyberpunk movement and significant contributions to the popular Half-Life video game series. Laidlaw first started publishing idiosyncratic, hard-to-define short fiction in the late 1970s, but is perhaps best known for writing Dad’s Nuke (1985) and The 37th Mandala (1996), which won the International Horror Guild Award. ‘The Diane Arbus Suicide Portfolio’ (1993) is one of a series of stories by Laidlaw with photographic themes. Laidlaw had ‘always loved Arbus’s photography’ and was inspired by her sad but gripping biography. The story uses the weird as an entrypoint to appreciating Arbus’s work.##The Country Doctor


Steven Utley


Steven Utley (1948–) is an American writer of science fiction and fantasy. Early on, Utley belonged to what would become the famous Turkey City Writers’ Workshop, which also included Bruce Sterling and Lisa Tuttle (the latter also included in this volume). A Nebula Award finalist, Utley has frequently appeared in Asimov’s Science Fiction, The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, and Analog. He is best known for his Silurian Tales, which chronicle the misadventures of a group of scientists sent back to the Paleozoic era. Collections include Beasts of Love (2005). ‘The Country Doctor’ is a bit of a departure for Utley, despite its archaeological bent: a creepy weird tale reminiscent of the work of Michael Shea.##Last Rites and Resurrections


Martin Simpson


Martin Simpson (1962–) is an American writer who has won the British Fantasy Award and serves as the Director of the University of Florida’s Reading & Writing Center. Ann VanderMeer published his first story, ‘Last Rites and Resurrections’ (1994), in her magazine The Silver Web. ‘Last Rites’ is a powerful meditation on loss that uses a naturalistic approach to the weird common to horror fiction from the 1990s. It subsequently became the title story of The Third Alternative’s first best-of anthology. The inspiration for the story came from Simpson’s daily drive while an assistant professor. ‘I began to get depressed by the amount of roadkill. Morose meditations led me to imagine the last thoughts of the animals.’##The Ocean and All Its Devices


William Browning Spencer


William Browning Spencer (1946–) is an award-winning American writer living in Austin, Texas. His weird tales often contain an undercurrent of dark humor while novels like 1995’s quirky Résumé With Monsters and Zod Wallop seem both sui generis and steeped in the history of strange fiction. In 2005, his short story ‘Pep Talk’ was turned into a short film for Project Greenlight and premiered at the Santa Fe Film Festival in December 2006. ‘The Ocean and All of Its Devices’ (1994), about a strange family secret at an off-season hotel, is typical of Spencer’s work: effortless, understated, at times terrifying, and nicely updating the weird tales tradition.##The Delicate


Jeffrey Ford


The Delicate is pale, limbs pipe-cleaner thin, with a head as shiny hard as beetle-back. Violent, in utero skull tectonics have led to a precipice of brow, a compression of matter past the point of truth. His eyes are crow eyes, and his ear holes winding tunnels to nowhere.##The Man in the Black Suit


Stephen King


Stephen King (1947–) is one of the most influential post-World War II American writers of horror and weird fiction. His books have sold over three hundred and fifty million copies. Early classics that established King’s reputation include Salem’s Lot (1975), The Shining (1977), The Stand (1978), and The Dark Tower: The Gunslinger (1982). King has noted Richard Matheson, H.P. Lovecraft, and Shirley Jackson as among his many influences. He received the Medal of Distinguished Contribution to American Letters from the National Book Foundation in 2003. Other awards include the Hugo Award, O. Henry Award, and World Fantasy Award. ‘The Man in the Black Suit’ is a beautifully written and terrifying tale of an encounter with the weird.##The Snow Pavilion


Angela Carter


Angela Carter (1940–1992) was an English writer of fantastical fiction ranked tenth by The Times in 2008 on their list of ‘The 50 greatest British writers since 1945’. Always a maverick, Carter filtered a love for weird fiction, folktales, and surrealists like Leonora Carrington through a feminist lens to create abidingly unique stories and novels that rank amongst the best of the twentieth century. Carter’s classics include The Infernal Desire Machines of Doctor Hoffman (1972) and Nights at the Circus (1984), along with several iconic story collections, especially Fireworks (1974) and The Bloody Chamber (1979). ‘The Snow Pavilion’ (1995) is a later story and perhaps the most evocative expression of the weird in her short fiction.##The Meat Garden


Craig Padawer


Craig Padawer (1961–) is an American fiction writer whose work has appeared in Conjunctions, Fiction International, and After Yesterday’s Crash: The Avant-Pop Anthology. He received his master’s degree in fiction writing from Brown University. ‘The Meat Garden’ (1996) comes to the weird from the surreal, creating a snapshot of a war both familiar and dislocatingly strange. According to Padawer, the story had its inspiration in both the Iraq War and ‘the notion of a body at war with itself…[the tumor] that would inevitably bloom into my father’s death was growing essentially in his mind. It was transforming him in every possible way – not just physically, but mentally. I still find that notion simultaneously terrifying and somehow absurdly beautiful.’##The Stiff and the Stile


Stepan Chapman

In the vast desert known as Oregon, during the peak years of the Bovine Brain Rot, a poor old woman lived all by herself, in a hovel in a graveyard. Her tin roof shed the worst of the acid rain, and she was glad to have the graveyard’s thick stone wall between her and the half-starved cutthroats that roved the road. The old woman lived by her wits, venturing by night into the ruins of Portland to steal garbage from the dumpsters there.##Yellow and Red


Tanith Lee


Tanith Lee (1947–) is a highly respected English writer of science fiction, horror, and fantasy, with over seventy novels and hundreds of short stories to her credit. She has been a regular contributor over many years to Weird Tales magazine. She has won the World Fantasy Award, the British Fantasy Award, and the Nebula Award multiple times. Along with Daphne du Maurier, Lee has established herself as one of the preeminent writers coming to the weird from Gothic fiction. ‘Yellow and Red’ (1998) contains several of the Lee trademarks: atmosphere, a sensual style, and a creeping sense of dread. It also seems to riff off of M. R. James’s classic ‘Casting the Runes’.##The Specialist’s Hat


Kelly Link


Kelly Link (1969–) is an influential American writer of hard-to-classify short fiction that has been described as fantasy, slipstream, or magic realism. Link has published three collections: Stranger Things Happen (2001), Magic for Beginners (2005), and Pretty Monsters (2008). Her stories have won the Nebula, Hugo, and World Fantasy Awards. Although not known as a writer of ‘weird tales’ per se, most of Link’s stories tend to be grounded in an underlying darkness. The story reprinted here, ‘The Specialist’s Hat’ (1998), creeps up on the reader, slowly trading a sense of innocence for one of terror. The story is technically as perfect as Shirley Jackson’s ‘The Summer People’ and showcases the effortless complexity of Link’s fiction.##A Redress for Andromeda


Caitlín R. Kiernan


Caitlín R. Kiernan (1964–) is an American author who has steadily moved beyond a reputation as an heir to the legacy of H. P. Lovecraft and Southern Gothic literature, to become one of the most original and audacious weird writers of her generation. In addition to her many award-winning novels and stories, Kiernan has written scientific papers that reflect her love of herpetology and paleontology, also reflected in her fiction. Perhaps more than any other writer of the past thirty years, Kiernan places the reader somewhere alien and inhabits points of view that seem both luminous and edgy. ‘A Redress for Andromeda’ (2000) is a perfect example of Kiernan’s ability to portray the uncanny in original and terrifying ways.##The God of Dark Laughter


Michael Chabon


Michael Chabon (1963–) is a celebrated American writer who has written in several different genres, although best-known for novels of mainstream realism with elements of fantasy. His novels include Wonder Boys (1995), The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier & Clay (2000) and the alternative history mystery The Yiddish Policemen’s Union (2007). Chabon has won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction, the Hugo Award, Sidewise Award, and the Nebula Award. A fan of the weird tale, Chabon has written several stories in that mode including ‘The God of Dark Laughter,’ which contains references to Lovecraft and a nod to the work of Edgar Allan Poe. The story was first published in 2001 in the New Yorker.##Details


China Miéville


China Miéville (1972–) is an influential English writer known for revitalizing weird fiction, and remains the leading figure in the New Weird movement. He has won the World Fantasy Award and multiple Arthur C. Clarke awards, among others. Miéville’s early novels – including Perdido Street Station (2001) and The Scar (2002) – fused the weird with body transformation, Marxist politics, secondary world settings, and a bold, often pulpy style. Later novels like The City and the City (2009) and Embassytown (2011) feature a more stripped-down style without sacrificing the visionary quality of the weird. Stories like ‘Details’ (2002) show that he had delicacy of touch early in his career, as well as an encyclopedic knowledge of weird fiction.##The Genius of Assassins: Three Dreams of Murder in the First Person


Michael Cisco


Michael Cisco (1970–) is an American writer best known for his first novel, The Divinity Student (1999), which was published by Ann VanderMeer’s Buzzcity Press and won the International Horror Guild Award in 1999. Since then, Cisco has published The Tyrant (2003), The San Veneficio Canon (2005), The Traitor (2007), The Narrator (2010), and The Great Lover (2011). Taken together, these books represent the greatest oeuvre of any late-twentieth/early-twenty-first century writer of weird fiction – all the more remarkable because of the difficulty of sustaining the visionary quality of such narratives over the novel length. ‘The Genius of Assassins’ (2002) is a harrowing and hallucinogenic story that ventures far beyond most writers’ comfort zone but is typical of Cisco’s work.##Feeders and Eaters


Neil Gaiman


This is a true story, pretty much. As far as that goes, and whatever good it does anybody.##The Cage


Jeff VanderMeer


Jeff VanderMeer (1968–) is an American writer and editor sometimes associated with the New Weird because of his surreal, grotesque fictions set in fantasy city of Ambergris. A World Fantasy Award-winner, VanderMeer has also been a finalist for the Hugo, Nebula, Shirley Jackson, and Philip K. Dick awards. Spanning a period of five hundred years, the Ambergris Cycle consists of City of Saints & Madmen (2001), Shriek: An Afterword (2006), and Finch (2009). Short story collections include Secret Life (2004) and The Third Bear (2010). His major influences include Vladimir Nabokov and Angela Carter. The creepy and luminous ‘The Cage’, reprinted from City of Saints, chronicles the dangerous impulse to deliberately seek out the weird.##The Beautiful Gelreesh


Jeffrey Ford

His facial fur was a swirling wonder of blond and blue with highlights the deep orange of a November sun. It covered every inch of his brow and cheeks, the blunt ridge of his nose, even his eyelids. When beset by a bout of overwhelming sympathy, he would twirl the thicket of longer strands that sprouted from the center of his forehead. His bright silver eyes emitted invisible beams that penetrated the most guarded demeanors of his patients and shed light upon the condition of their souls. Discovering the essence of an individual, the Gelreesh would sit quietly, staring, tapping the black enamel nails of his hirsute hands together in an incantatory rhythm that would regulate the heartbeat of his visitor to that of his own blood muscle.##The Town Manager


Thomas Ligotti


Thomas Ligotti (1953–) is an iconic American writer of weird short fiction whose oeuvre has been as ground-breaking as, if not always as well-acknowledged as, that of Edgar Allan Poe, Franz Kafka, and H. P. Lovecraft. His first collection, Songs of a Dead Dreamer (1986), is an outright classic in the field. His subsequent compilation, The Nightmare Factory (1996), won both the Bram Stoker Award and the British Fantasy Award. The influence of workplace experiences infused Ligotti’s fiction with fresh energy, resulting in the masterpiece My Work Is Not Yet Done (2002). ‘The Town Manager’ (2003) showcases Ligotti in his mature phase. The underlying dark sense of humor is more prevalent in his fiction generally than is acknowledged by most critics.##The Brotherhood of Mutilation


Brian Evenson


Brian Evenson (1966–) is an influential writer of dark fiction that often seems surreal or Kafkaesque. He is also a translator of French literature and the Chair of the Literary Arts Program at Brown University, as well as a senior editor of the Conjunctions literary journal published by Bard College. Evenson’s critically acclaimed story collections include The Wavering Knife (2004) and Fugue State (2009). Strange or absurd happenings occur with frequency in his fiction, and nothing could be odder than the events that occur in ‘The Brotherhood of Mutilation’ (2003), later expanded into the novel Last Days (2009). The novella is a modern classic of weird ritual, mixed with noir and horror.##Flat Diane


Daniel Abraham


Daniel Abraham (1969–) is an American author who lives in Albuquerque, New Mexico. His first short story, ‘Mixing Rebecca’, was published by Ann VanderMeer in The Silver Web in 1996. Since then his short stories have appeared in numerous publications and anthologies. The disturbing novelette ‘Flat Diane’ (2004) reprinted here was nominated for the Nebula Award and won the International Horror Guild Award in 2005. Abraham has also been nominated for the Hugo Award and the World Fantasy Award. He is primarily known for his fantasy series such as the Long Price Quartet, which features a world where poets use magic in a struggle for power. However, his early short fiction made powerful use of surrealism and horror.##Singing My Sister Down


Margo Lanagan


Margo Lanagan (1960–) is an Australian writer primarily known for her dark fantasy short stories, some of which are influenced by folktale. Although Lanagan has been a published author since 1990, she first came to the attention of readers outside of her own country with the collection Black Juice (2004), for which she won a World Fantasy Award and a Michael L. Printz Honor Award. Subsequently, Lanagan has become perhaps the most critically acclaimed contemporary Australian fantasist, and her novel Tender Morsels (2008) also won a World Fantasy Award. New work includes the novel Watered Silk (2011) and the story collection Yellowcake (2011). The horrifying ‘Singing My Sister Down’ (2005) is Lanagan’s most anthologized story and continues the thread of ‘weird ritual’ stories in this volume.##The People on the Island


T. M. Wright


T. M. Wright (1968–) is an American horror writer whose first novel, Strange Seed (1978), was nominated for a World Fantasy Award. More than a dozen novels have appeared since, including The Playground (1982), Carlisle Street (1983), The Island (1988), The Place (1989), The School (1990), Boundaries (1990), The Last Vampire (1991), and Little Boy Lost (1992). Wright’s short fiction has appeared in Twilight Zone magazine and many others. His seventh novel, A Manhattan Ghost Story (1984), has had fourteen foreign editions. The disturbing and surreal ‘The People on the Island’ (2005) is an unusual tale that at times evokes Shirley Jackson while placing its characters fully within the weird.##The Forest


Laird Barron


Laird Barron (1970–) is an American writer, much of whose critically acclaimed work falls within the horror, noir, and dark fantasy genres. In his fiction, the influence of Lovecraft and Lucius Shepard has been subsumed by his own themes and concerns, creating such potent and original modern takes on the weird tale as ‘The Forest’ (2007). Barron spent his early years in Alaska and moved to Washington in 1994, where he became a certified strength trainer and earned a third degree brown belt in Professor Bradley J. Steiner’s Jen Do Tao system. He has received multiple Shirley Jackson awards for his fiction.##The Hide


Liz Williams


Liz Williams (1965–) is an English writer of science fiction and fantasy whose first two novels, The Ghost Sister (2001) and Empire of Bones (2002), were nominated for the Philip K. Dick Award. She is the daughter of a conjurer and a gothic novelist and has a Ph.D. in science from Cambridge. From the mid-nineties until 2000, she lived and worked in Kazakhstan. Her short fiction has appeared in Asimov’s Science Fiction, Interzone, Strange Horizons, Realms of Fantasy, The Third Alternative and many others. The beautifully written weird tale ‘The Hide’ (2007) conveys a sense of place and of modern unease reminiscent of M. John Harrison or Ramsey Campbell but with Williams’ own unique perspective and style.##Dust Enforcer


Reza Negarestani


Reza Negarestani (1977–) is an Iranian writer and philosopher who has worked in different areas of contemporary philosophy, speculative thought, and politics. These studies inform his stories, which tend to use the shell of nonfiction forms in a Borgesian way, often as a delivery system for the weird. His most recent book is Cyclonopedia: Complicity with Anonymous Materials (2008), which is at once a horror fiction, an atlas of demonology, a political samizdat, and a philosophic grimoire. Perhaps the most innovative and audacious weird text of the decade, the book fuses Lovecraftian horror and Middle Eastern history with occult war machines and the US ‘war on terror.’ ‘The Dust Enforcer’ is a chapter from Cyclonopedia.##The Familiars


Micaela Morrissette


Micaela Morrissette (1979–) is an American writer who, thus far, specializes in short fiction, fueled by Decadent, fantastical, and weird sensibilities. She is a senior editor for the US literary magazine Conjunctions and a fiction reviewer for Jacket and Rain Taxi. The recipient of a Pushcart Prize, Morrissette has published fiction in Conjunctions, Weird Tales, Best American Fantasy, and The Year’s Best Fantasy and Horror, among others. On the basis of just a handful of tales, she is one of the best of the next generation of weird writers. Displaying the full range of her talents, ‘The Familiars’ (2009) takes an almost Bradbury-esque idea and revitalizes it to chilling effect.##The Lion’s Den


Steve Duffy


Steve Duffy (1963–) is a contemporary British writer who has lived in Norfolk and London, but is currently living and working on the North Wales coast. He is a recipient of the International Horror Guild Award for the story ‘The Rag-and-Bone Men’ and has published two short story collections, Tragic Life Stories and The Moment of Panic. Duffy’s work has appeared in several of Datlow and Windling’s The Year’s Best Fantasy and Horror anthologies. ‘In the Lion’s Den’ (2009) is one of those most difficult of weird fictions to write: a tale in which references to modern technology add to, rather than detract from, the rising sense of unease.##Little Lambs


Stephen Graham Jones


Stephen Graham Jones (1972–) is an American writer of both stories and novels. His most recent books are It Came from Del Rio (2010) and The Ones That Got Away (2010). Jones has been a finalist for the Shirley Jackson Award and Black Quill Award, as well as a winner of the Texas Institute of Letters Award and a National Endowment for the Arts Fellow in fiction. His short fiction has appeared in Cemetery Dance, Asimov’s Science Fiction Magazine, Weird Tales, and multiple best-of-the-year compilations. ‘Little Lambs’ (2009) is a perfect example of Jones at his chilling and slightly experimental best, evoking, as the story does, both weird classics and more avant garde work from the likes of Mark Danielewski.##Portal


J. Robert Lennon

##Saving the Gleeful Horse


K. J. Bishop


K. J. Bishop (1972–) is an Australian writer and artist. In 2004, her neo-Decadent fantasy novel The Etched City was nominated for a World Fantasy Award and she won the William L. Crawford Award, the Ditmar Award for Best Novel, and the Ditmar Award for Best New Talent. Her work has appeared in several publications including Leviathan 4, Fantasy magazine, and Subterranean magazine. Most infamously, her novella ‘Maldoror Abroad’ appeared in Album Zutique; the story riffed on the original Les Chants de Maldoror (1869) by Isidore Lucien Ducasse under the pen name ‘Comte de Lautréamont’. Her tale ‘Saving the Gleeful Horse’ (2010) shares affinities with Decadent modes of writing, including the Alfred Kubin excerpt that opened The Weird.##Afterweird: The Efficacy of a Worm-Eaten Dictionary


China Miéville

